1. Continuum (Minneap Minn). 2017 Feb;23(1, Cerebrovascular Disease):15-39. doi: 
10.1212/CON.0000000000000416.

Stroke Epidemiology and Risk Factor Management.

Guzik A, Bushnell C.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Death from stroke has decreased over the past decade, with 
stroke now the fifth leading cause of death in the United States. In addition, 
the incidence of new and recurrent stroke is declining, likely because of the 
increased use of specific prevention medications, such as statins and 
antihypertensives. Despite these positive trends in incidence and mortality, 
many strokes remain preventable. The major modifiable risk factors are 
hypertension, diabetes mellitus, tobacco smoking, and hyperlipidemia, as well as 
lifestyle factors, such as obesity, poor diet/nutrition, and physical 
inactivity. This article reviews the current recommendations for the management 
of each of these modifiable risk factors.
RECENT FINDINGS: It has been documented that some blood pressure medications may 
increase variability of blood pressure and ultimately increase the risk for 
stroke. Stroke prevention typically includes antiplatelet therapy (unless an 
indication for anticoagulation exists), so the most recent evidence supporting 
use of these drugs is reviewed. In addition, emerging risk factors, such as 
obstructive sleep apnea, electronic cigarettes, and elevated lipoprotein (a), 
are discussed.
SUMMARY: Overall, secondary stroke prevention includes a multifactorial 
approach. This article incorporates evidence from guidelines and published 
studies and uses an illustrative case study throughout the article to provide 
examples of secondary prevention management of stroke risk factors.

DOI: 10.1212/CON.0000000000000416
PMID: 28157742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Physiol. 2020 Nov;598(22):5039-5062. doi: 10.1113/JP279754. Epub 2020 Oct 12.

Effects of e-cigarettes and vaping devices on cardiac and pulmonary physiology.

Tsai M(1), Byun MK(2)(3)(4), Shin J(2)(3), Crotty Alexander LE(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)Pulmonary and Critical Care Section, VA San Diego Healthcare System, La 
Jolla, CA, USA.
(3)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, University of California San Diego (UCSD), La Jolla, CA, USA.
(4)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine, Gangnam Severance 
Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

E-cigarette aerosols are exceedingly different from conventional tobacco smoke, 
containing dozens of chemicals not found in cigarette smoke. It is highly likely 
that chronic use of e-cigarettes will induce pathological changes in both the 
heart and lungs. Here we review human and animal studies published to date and 
summarize the cardiopulmonary physiological changes caused by vaping. In terms 
of cardiac physiology, acute exposure to e-cigarette aerosols in human subjects 
led to increased blood pressure and heart rate, similar to traditional 
cigarettes. Chronic exposure to e-cigarette aerosols using animal models caused 
increased arterial stiffness, vascular endothelial changes, increased 
angiogenesis, cardiorenal fibrosis and increased atherosclerotic plaque 
formation. Pulmonary physiology is also affected by e-cigarette aerosol 
inhalation, with increased airway reactivity, airway obstruction, inflammation 
and emphysema. Research thus far demonstrates that the heart and lung undergo 
numerous changes in response to e-cigarette use, and disease development will 
depend on how those changes combine with both environmental and genetic factors. 
E-cigarettes have been advertised as a healthy alternative to cigarette smoking, 
and users are under the impression that vaping of e-cigarettes is harmless, but 
these claims that e-cigarettes are safer and healthier are not based on 
evidence. Data from both humans and animal models are consistent in 
demonstrating that vaping of e-cigarettes causes health effects both similar to 
and disparate from those of cigarette smoking. Further work is needed to define 
the long-term cardiopulmonary effects of e-cigarette use in humans.

© 2020 The Authors. The Journal of Physiology © 2020 The Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1113/JP279754
PMCID: PMC10506663
PMID: 32975834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.


3. Tob Control. 2014 May;23 Suppl 2(Suppl 2):ii36-40. doi: 
10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2013-051470.

Electronic cigarettes: human health effects.

Callahan-Lyon P.

OBJECTIVE: With the rapid increase in use of electronic nicotine delivery 
systems (ENDS), such as electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes), users and 
non-users are exposed to the aerosol and product constituents. This is a review 
of published data on the human health effects of exposure to e-cigarettes and 
their components.
METHODS: Literature searches were conducted through September 2013 using 
multiple electronic databases.
RESULTS: Forty-four articles are included in this analysis. E-cigarette aerosols 
may contain propylene glycol, glycerol, flavourings, other chemicals and, 
usually, nicotine. Aerosolised propylene glycol and glycerol produce mouth and 
throat irritation and dry cough. No data on the effects of flavouring inhalation 
were identified. Data on short-term health effects are limited and there are no 
adequate data on long-term effects. Aerosol exposure may be associated with 
respiratory function impairment, and serum cotinine levels are similar to those 
in traditional cigarette smokers. The high nicotine concentrations of some 
products increase exposure risks for non-users, particularly children. The 
dangers of secondhand and thirdhand aerosol exposure have not been thoroughly 
evaluated.
CONCLUSIONS: Scientific evidence regarding the human health effects of 
e-cigarettes is limited. While e-cigarette aerosol may contain fewer toxicants 
than cigarette smoke, studies evaluating whether e-cigarettes are less harmful 
than cigarettes are inconclusive. Some evidence suggests that e-cigarette use 
may facilitate smoking cessation, but definitive data are lacking. No 
e-cigarette has been approved by FDA as a cessation aid. Environmental concerns 
and issues regarding non-user exposure exist. The health impact of e-cigarettes, 
for users and the public, cannot be determined with currently available data.

DOI: 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2013-051470
PMCID: PMC3995250
PMID: 24732161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2020 Dec 1;319(6):H1234-H1239. doi: 
10.1152/ajpheart.00708.2020. Epub 2020 Oct 2.

Heat-not-burn tobacco products: an emerging threat to cardiovascular health.

Fried ND(1), Gardner JD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, 
New Orleans, Louisiana.

Cigarette smoking is at all-time lows globally, but the use of electronic 
cigarettes has increased profoundly. Recent reports of electronic cigarette or 
vaping use-associated lung injury may lead individuals to explore novel methods 
of nicotine consumption, such as heat-not-burn devices. IQOS from Philip Morris, 
a heat-not-burn device, became available for purchase in the United States in 
October 2019. Philip Morris claims that 8.8 million people have abandoned 
traditional cigarettes in favor of IQOS; however, evidence suggests that it may 
act as a gateway or complement to cigarette smoking, rather than a replacement. 
Surveys indicate that 96% of Korean IQOS users also smoke cigarettes, and 45% of 
Italian users of IQOS had never smoked cigarettes. In the United States, Canada, 
and England, susceptibility of youth to trying IQOS was slightly lower than 
electronic cigarettes, but higher than cigarette smoking. Heat-not-burn products 
produce mainstream and second-hand emissions of harmful chemicals, including 
nicotine, particulate matter, benzene, acrolein, and tobacco-specific 
nitrosamines. The levels of these emissions, despite being less than those of 
traditional cigarettes, are potentially harmful to cardiovascular health. A 
study of current smokers showed similar acute effects of heat-not-burn tobacco 
products and traditional cigarettes on heart rate, blood pressure, and arterial 
stiffness. Rats exposed to IQOS had similar vascular endothelial function 
impairment to those exposed to cigarettes. Heat-not-burn aerosol exposure of 
cultured macrophages elicited increased oxidative stress, although less than 
that induced by cigarette smoke. Further studies are needed to better understand 
the cardiovascular effects of heat-not-burn tobacco products.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00708.2020
PMCID: PMC7792702
PMID: 33006919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest, financial or 
otherwise, are declared by the authors.


5. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 2021 Oct;133(19-20):1020-1027. doi: 
10.1007/s00508-020-01711-z. Epub 2020 Jul 20.

Health effects of electronic cigarette (e‑cigarette) use on organ systems and 
its implications for public health.

Seiler-Ramadas R(1), Sandner I(2), Haider S(2), Grabovac I(2), Dorner TE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Social and Preventive Medicine, Centre for Public Health, 
Medical University of Vienna, Kinderspitalgasse 15/1, 1090, Vienna, Austria. 
radhika.seiler-ramadas@meduniwien.ac.at.
(2)Department of Social and Preventive Medicine, Centre for Public Health, 
Medical University of Vienna, Kinderspitalgasse 15/1, 1090, Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: There has been growing concern over the use of electronic cigarettes 
(e-cigarettes) in recent years. Although advocated as an aid to smoking 
cessation, there is increasing evidence of harm not just to the respiratory 
system, but to all other organs in the body. To give a clearer picture on how 
e‑cigarettes can affect our health, we gathered an overview of the literature on 
the various health effects of e‑cigarettes and categorized them into how they 
specifically affect organ systems. E‑cigarette exposure has produced a range of 
stress and inflammatory reactions in the pulmonary system, including shortness 
of breath, coughing, wheezing, bronchial and pulmonary irritations, and impaired 
pulmonary function. In the oral and gastrointestinal system, gingival 
inflammation, sore throat, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea have been reported. 
Increased tachycardia and blood pressure were reported reactions in the 
cardiovascular system. In the neurological system headaches, irritability, 
anxiety, dependence and insomnia were observed. Other effects included ocular 
irritation, contact dermatitis, acute renal insufficiency, toxicity and 
potential carcinogenicity. Nevertheless, studies have found improvements in 
time-based memory and nicotine withdrawal associated with the cessation of 
conventional cigarette smoking and switching to e‑cigarette use. Also, toxic and 
carcinogenic metabolites were reportedly lower in e‑cigarette smokers than in 
conventional cigarette smokers.
CONCLUSION: A growing number of studies are showing the adverse effects caused 
by e‑cigarettes on all human organ systems. Further research on the chemical 
components, the diverse flavors, and the long-term effects on active and passive 
users are needed to clarify the implications of e‑cigarette use on individual 
and public health.

© 2020. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00508-020-01711-z
PMCID: PMC8500897
PMID: 32691214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: R. Seiler-Ramadas, I. Sandner, S. Haider, 
I. Grabovac and T.E. Dorner declare that they have no competing interests.


6. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2019 May 1;316(5):L705-L719. doi: 
10.1152/ajplung.00492.2018. Epub 2019 Feb 6.

Fourth generation e-cigarette vaping induces transient lung inflammation and gas 
exchange disturbances: results from two randomized clinical trials.

Chaumont M(1), van de Borne P(1), Bernard A(2), Van Muylem A(3), Deprez G(4), 
Ullmo J(1), Starczewska E(1), Briki R(5), de Hemptinne Q(5), Zaher W(5), Debbas 
N(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Erasme University Hospital, Université Libre de 
Bruxelles , Brussels , Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, Institute of Experimental 
and Clinical Research, Université Catholique de Louvain , Brussels , Belgium.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Erasme University Hospital, Université 
Libre de Bruxelles , Brussels , Belgium.
(4)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Erasme University Hospital, Université 
Libre de Bruxelles , Brussels , Belgium.
(5)Department of Cardiology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Saint-Pierre, 
Université Libre de Bruxelles , Brussels , Belgium.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2019 May 1;316(5):L703-L704.

When heated by an electronic cigarette, propylene glycol and glycerol produce a 
nicotine-carrying-aerosol. This hygroscopic/hyperosmolar aerosol can deposit 
deep within the lung. Whether these deposits trigger local inflammation and 
disturb pulmonary gas exchanges is not known. The aim of this study was to 
assess the acute effects of high-wattage electronic cigarette vaping with or 
without nicotine on lung inflammation biomarkers, transcutaneous gas tensions, 
and pulmonary function tests in young and healthy tobacco smokers. Acute effects 
of vaping without nicotine on arterial blood gas tensions were also assessed in 
heavy smokers suspected of coronary artery disease. Using a single-blind 
within-subjects study design, 25 young tobacco smokers underwent three 
experimental sessions in random order: sham-vaping and vaping with and without 
nicotine at 60 W. Twenty heavy smokers were also exposed to sham-vaping (n = 10) 
or vaping without nicotine (n = 10) in an open-label, randomized parallel study. 
In the young tobacco smokers, compared with sham-vaping: 1) serum club cell 
protein-16 increased after vaping without nicotine (mean ± SE, -0.5 ± 0.2 vs. 
+1.1 ± 0.3 µg/l, P = 0.013) and vaping with nicotine (+1.2 ± 0.3 µg/l, P = 
0.009); 2) transcutaneous oxygen tension decreased for 60 min after vaping 
without nicotine (nadir, -0.3 ± 1 vs. -15.3 ± 2.3 mmHg, P < 0.001) and for 
80-min after vaping with nicotine (nadir, -19.6 ± 2.8 mmHg, P < 0.001). Compared 
with sham vaping, vaping without nicotine decreased arterial oxygen tension for 
5 min in heavy-smoking patients (+5.4 ± 3.3 vs. -5.4 ± 1.9 mmHg, P = 0.012). 
Acute vaping of propylene glycol/glycerol aerosol at high wattage with or 
without nicotine induces airway epithelial injury and sustained decrement in 
transcutaneous oxygen tension in young tobacco smokers. Intense vaping 
conditions also transiently impair arterial oxygen tension in heavy smokers.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00492.2018
PMCID: PMC6589591
PMID: 30724099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest, financial or 
otherwise, are declared by the authors.


7. Lancet Respir Med. 2019 Dec;7(12):1017-1026. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(19)30415-1. 
Epub 2019 Nov 8.

E-cigarette, or vaping, product use associated lung injury (EVALI): case series 
and diagnostic approach.

Kalininskiy A(1), Bach CT(2), Nacca NE(3), Ginsberg G(4), Marraffa J(5), 
Navarette KA(6), McGraw MD(7), Croft DP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care, University of 
Rochester, Rochester NY, USA. Electronic address: 
aleksandr_kalininskiy@urmc.rochester.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary Diseases and Critical Care, University of 
Rochester, Rochester NY, USA; Strong Memorial Hospital, Rochester, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Rochester, Rochester NY, USA; 
Strong Memorial Hospital, Rochester, NY, USA; Upstate New York Poison Center, 
Syracuse, NY, USA.
(4)New York State Department of Health, Albany, NY, USA; Center for 
Environmental Health, Albany, NY, USA.
(5)Upstate New York Poison Center, Syracuse, NY, USA; Department of Emergency 
Medicine, Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, USA.
(6)New York State Department of Health, Albany, NY, USA; Center for 
Environmental Health, Albany, NY, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Albany Medical 
Center, Albany, NY, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Pulmonology, University of Rochester, Rochester NY, 
USA; Strong Memorial Hospital, Rochester, NY, USA.

Comment in
    Lancet Respir Med. 2019 Dec;7(12):994-995.

BACKGROUND: Since June, 2019, more than 1000 new cases of e-cigarette, or 
vaping, product use associated lung injury (EVALI) have been reported in the 
USA. Patients presented with dyspnoea, cough, and were found to be hypoxaemic 
with bilateral airspace opacities on chest imaging. Most patients required 
management in the intensive care unit and steroid therapy. All patients 
recovered with cessation of vaping, supportive care, and steroid therapy and 
remained symptom free at follow up. E-cigarette use continues to rapidly 
escalate in the USA, particularly among youth.
METHODS: Cases were defined as patients admitted to the University of Rochester 
Medical Center (Rochester, NY, USA) who had used e-cigarettes or another vaping 
device in the 30 days before presentation, and who had bilateral airspace 
opacification on chest imaging (CT or x-ray). Case details were obtained via 
medical record review and patient interviews over the past 3 months including 
symptomatology, physical exam data, imaging studies, laboratory data, vaping 
history, and subsequent outpatient follow-up data. In collaboration with the New 
York State Department of Health, our hospital developed a novel clinical 
practice algorithm based on statewide physician feedback along with input from 
experts in environmental health, medical toxicology, infectious disease, 
epidemiology, and chronic disease prevention.
FINDINGS: We report 12 cases treated for suspected EVALI at our medical centre 
between June 6, 2019, and Sept 15, 2019. Ten (83%) patients had dyspnoea, fever, 
and emesis and nine (75%) had cough. 11 (92%) patients reported the use of 
e-cigarette cartridges containing tetrahydrocannabinol oil. Although eight (67%) 
patients required admission to the intensive care unit for hypoxaemic 
respiratory failure, no deaths occurred. The median hospitalisation duration was 
7 days (IQR 7-8). All patients completing follow up (6 [50%]) had resolution of 
previous chest CT findings and normal spirometry. The clinical algorithm focuses 
on the key signs and symptoms of EVALI and the importance of ruling out 
infection and other cardiopulmonary conditions before making a presumptive 
diagnosis of EVALI.
INTERPRETATION: Patients with suspected EVALI in our cohort had life-threatening 
hypoxaemia, with 67% requiring management in the intensive care unit. Despite 
the severity of presentation, similar to previous reports of patients with 
EVALI, most patients improved within 1-2 weeks of initial presentation after 
vaping cessation and administration of systemic corticosteroids when needed. 
Almost all (92%) patients with suspected EVALI reported vaping a THC product, 
making THC containing e-liquids or oils a key focus on the ongoing nationwide 
investigations into the cause of EVALI. Additional research is required to 
understand the potential toxins, underlying pathophysiological mechanisms, and 
identification of susceptible individuals at higher risk for hospitalisation due 
to EVALI. To our knowledge we present the first clinical practice algorithm for 
the evaluation and management of EVALI, which will be useful for both acute 
management and improved accurate reporting of this life-threatening respiratory 
illness.
FUNDING: None.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-2600(19)30415-1
PMCID: PMC11077418
PMID: 31711871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests We declare no competing 
interests.


8. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2022 Nov;42(11):1333-1350. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.121.317749. Epub 2022 Oct 26.

Chronic E-Cigarette Use Impairs Endothelial Function on the Physiological and 
Cellular Levels.

Mohammadi L(1), Han DD(1)(2), Xu F(3), Huang A(4), Derakhshandeh R(1), Rao 
P(1)(5), Whitlatch A(4), Cheng J(6), Keith RJ(7), Hamburg NM(8), Ganz P(1), 
Hellman J(3), Schick SF(4)(9), Springer ML(1)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology (L.M., D.D.H., R.D., P.R., P.G., M.L.S.), University 
of California, San Francisco.
(2)Now with School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Rochester, NY 
(D.D.H.).
(3)Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care (F.X., J.H.), University of 
California, San Francisco.
(4)Division of Occupational and Environmental Medicine (A.H., A.W., S.F.S.), 
University of California, San Francisco.
(5)Now with CHRISTUS Good Shepherd Internal Medicine Residency Program, 
Longview, TX (P.R.).
(6)Division of Oral Epidemiology and Dental Public Health (J.C.), University of 
California, San Francisco.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of Louisville Medical School, KY (R.J.K.).
(8)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, MA (N.M.H.).
(9)Center for Tobacco Control Research and Education (S.F.S., M.L.S.), 
University of California, San Francisco.
(10)Cardiovascular Research Institute (M.L.S.), University of California, San 
Francisco.

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2022 Nov;42(11):1351-1354.

BACKGROUND: The harmful vascular effects of smoking are well established, but 
the effects of chronic use of electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes) on 
endothelial function are less understood. We hypothesized that e-cigarette use 
causes changes in blood milieu that impair endothelial function.
METHODS: Endothelial function was measured in chronic e-cigarette users, chronic 
cigarette smokers, and nonusers. We measured effects of participants' sera, or 
e-cigarette aerosol condensate, on NO and H2O2 release and cell permeability in 
cultured endothelial cells (ECs).
RESULTS: E-cigarette users and smokers had lower flow-mediated dilation (FMD) 
than nonusers. Sera from e-cigarette users and smokers reduced VEGF (vascular 
endothelial growth factor)-induced NO secretion by ECs relative to nonuser sera, 
without significant reduction in endothelial NO synthase mRNA or protein levels. 
E-cigarette user sera caused increased endothelial release of H2O2, and more 
permeability than nonuser sera. E-cigarette users and smokers exhibited changes 
in circulating biomarkers of inflammation, thrombosis, and cell adhesion 
relative to nonusers, but with distinct profiles. E-cigarette user sera had 
higher concentrations of the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) 
ligands S100A8 and HMGB1 (high mobility group box 1) than smoker and nonuser 
sera, and receptor for advanced glycation end product inhibition reduced 
permeability induced by e-cigarette user sera but did not affect NO production.
CONCLUSIONS: Chronic vaping and smoking both impair FMD and cause changes in the 
blood that inhibit endothelial NO release. Vaping, but not smoking, causes 
changes in the blood that increase microvascular endothelial permeability and 
may have a vaping-specific effect on intracellular oxidative state. Our results 
suggest a role for RAGE in e-cigarette-induced changes in endothelial function.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.121.317749
PMCID: PMC9625085
PMID: 36288290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None.


9. Cardiovasc Toxicol. 2019 Oct;19(5):441-450. doi: 10.1007/s12012-019-09516-x.

Acute Effects of Electronic Cigarette Inhalation on the Vasculature and the 
Conducting Airways.

Antoniewicz L(1), Brynedal A(2), Hedman L(3)(4), Lundbäck M(5), Bosson JA(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Internal Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences, Karolinska 
Institutet, Danderyd University Hospital, 182 88, Stockholm, Sweden. 
lukasz.antoniewicz@ki.se.
(2)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå University, Umeå, 
Sweden.
(3)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Occupational and 
Environmental Medicine, The OLIN Unit, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(4)Division of Nursing, Department of Health Science, Luleå University of 
Technology, Luleå, Sweden.
(5)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences, 
Karolinska Institutet, Danderyd University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

The use of electronic cigarettes has increased exponentially since its 
introduction onto the global market in 2006. However, short- and long-term 
health effects remain largely unknown due to the novelty of this product. The 
present study examines the acute effects of e-cigarette aerosol inhalation, with 
and without nicotine, on vascular and pulmonary function in healthy volunteers. 
Seventeen healthy subjects inhaled electronic cigarette aerosol with and without 
nicotine on two separate occasions in a double-blinded crossover fashion. Blood 
pressure, heart rate, and arterial stiffness measured by pulse wave velocity and 
pulse wave analysis were assessed at baseline, and then at 0 h, 2 h, and 4 h 
following exposure. Dynamic spirometry and impulse oscillometry were measured 
following vascular assessments at these time points, as well as at 6 h following 
exposure. e-Cigarette aerosol with nicotine caused a significant increase in 
heart rate and arterial stiffness. Furthermore, e-cigarette aerosol-containing 
nicotine caused a sudden increase in flow resistance as measured by impulse 
oscillometry, indicating obstruction of the conducting airways. Both aerosols 
caused an increase in blood pressure. The present study indicates that inhaled 
e-cigarette aerosol with nicotine has an acute impact on vascular and pulmonary 
function. Thus, chronic usage may lead to long-term adverse health effects. 
Further investigation is warranted.

DOI: 10.1007/s12012-019-09516-x
PMCID: PMC6746878
PMID: 30963443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


10. Can J Public Health. 2022 Apr;113(2):293-296. doi: 10.17269/s41997-021-00565-w. 
Epub 2021 Aug 26.

Are vaporizers a lower-risk alternative to smoking cannabis?

Chaiton M(1)(2)(3), Kundu A(4), Rueda S(5)(6)(7), Di Ciano P(5)(6)(8).

Author information:
(1)Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada. michael.chaiton@camh.ca.
(2)Ontario Tobacco Research Unit, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 155 
College St., Toronto, ON, M5T 3M7, Canada. michael.chaiton@camh.ca.
(3)Campbell Family Mental Health Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada. 
michael.chaiton@camh.ca.
(4)Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(5)Ontario Tobacco Research Unit, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 155 
College St., Toronto, ON, M5T 3M7, Canada.
(6)Campbell Family Mental Health Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(8)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
ON, Canada.

Cannabis use is associated with various adverse physical and mental health 
outcomes as well as increased risk of motor vehicle collision. Many 
organizations and the "Lower-Risk Cannabis Use Guidelines" have recommended to 
use cannabis vaporizers instead of smoking to reduce the associated health risk. 
This commentary draws attention to the present evidence regarding harm reduction 
potential of cannabis vaping. Cannabis vaporizer use can reduce the emission of 
carbon monoxide, chronic respiratory symptoms, and exposure to several toxins 
while producing similar subjective effects and blood THC concentration compared 
with smoking cannabis, holding potential for harm reduction among habitual 
cannabis smokers. However, new cannabis users, regardless of method of 
administration of cannabis, may experience intense subjective effects and 
cognitive impairment with increased susceptibility to dependence. Hence, policy 
makers should consider limiting access to cannabis among young people and 
adopting strategies to reduce impaired driving under influence of cannabis. 
Future research should focus on impact of switching from cannabis smoking to 
dried herb vaping using cannabis vaporizers among chronic cannabis smokers, and 
long-term outcomes of medical cannabis vaping, and further explore association 
of vaping-associated lung injury with THC-containing e-liquids.

Publisher: RéSUMé: L’usage du cannabis est associé à une panoplie de résultats 
de santé physique et mentale indésirables et à un risque accru de collision 
entre véhicules automobiles. De nombreux organismes, ainsi que les 
« Recommandations canadiennes pour l’usage du cannabis à moindre risque », 
recommandent d’utiliser un vaporisateur au lieu de fumer le cannabis afin d’en 
réduire les risques pour la santé. Notre commentaire attire l’attention sur les 
preuves actuelles concernant le potentiel de réduction des méfaits du vapotage 
du cannabis. L’utilisation d’un vaporisateur de cannabis peut réduire l’émission 
de monoxyde de carbone, les symptômes respiratoires chroniques et l’exposition à 
plusieurs toxines tout en produisant des effets subjectifs et une concentration 
de THC dans le sang semblables à ceux du cannabis fumé, ce qui pourrait réduire 
les méfaits chez les fumeurs réguliers de cannabis. Par contre, les nouveaux 
consommateurs de cannabis, peu importe la méthode d’administration du cannabis 
choisie, peuvent éprouver des effets subjectifs intenses et une détérioration 
cognitive, ainsi qu’une susceptibilité accrue à la dépendance. Les responsables 
des politiques devraient donc songer à limiter l’accès des jeunes au cannabis et 
adopter des stratégies pour réduire la conduite avec facultés affaiblies par 
cette drogue. Des études futures devraient porter sur les conséquences, pour les 
fumeurs réguliers de cannabis, de vapoter l’herbe séchée à l’aide d’un 
vaporisateur au lieu de fumer le cannabis, et sur les effets à long terme du 
vapotage du cannabis médical, et explorer plus avant l’association entre les 
lésions pulmonaires associées au vapotage et les liquides à vapoter contenant du 
THC.

© 2021. The Canadian Public Health Association.

DOI: 10.17269/s41997-021-00565-w
PMCID: PMC8975973
PMID: 34448130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

